# Patterns of Destruction: Exploring Wildfires from 1878 to 2019

### Purpose

Wildfires are becoming more destructive. Data shows an increasing trend in acreage burned per year. This increase also drives up the annual cost to control these destructive forces. The [Congressional Research Service](https://fas.org/sgp/crs/misc/IF10244.pdf) calculated the impact of wildland fires over the past decade (2011-2020). An average of 62,693 wildland fires annually, impacting 7.5 million acres annually are impacted by these fires. Although the majority of wildland fires occur in undeveloped areas which have little impact on communities or human development, these fires do occur mostly on federal lands (roughly 65%). Federal lands are land that is held in trust by the federal government, which is for the enjoyment of all Americans. Federal lands account for roughly 28% of land in the United States, approximately 640 million acres. 

While wildfires may not directly impact your residence (although they do for some people) they do impact land that you as an American are entilted to recreate on. If you've ever been to one of the many national parks in the western part of the country, you've likely seen the effects of wildland fires. There are five federal agencies responsible for wildfire management, the United States Department of Agriculture's Forest Service, the Department of the Interior’s Bureau of Indian Affairs, Bureau of Land Management, Fish and Wildlife Service, and National Park Service. 

Federal policy is not the only factor impacting wildland fires. The practice of clearcutting by the logging industry has changed the way our forests and ecosystems interact. Its devastation reaches beyond the aesthetic. Another important human induced factor is climate change. ["According to the NOAA 2019 Global Climate Summary, the combined land and ocean temperature has increased at an average rate of 0.07°C (0.13°F) per decade since 1880; however, the average rate of increase since 1981 (0.18°C / 0.32°F) is more than twice as great"](https://www.climate.gov/news-features/understanding-climate/climate-change-global-temperature#:~:text=Change%20over%20time&text=According%20to%20the%20NOAA%202019,more%20than%20twice%20as%20great.).

